az group list 

72-d63a26b0-accessing-and-using-the-azure-cloud-sh

az storage account list 

az vm list 

# VM Creation 
az vm create `
>> --name LabVM `
>> --resource-group 72-d63a26b0-accessing-and-using-the-azure-cloud-sh `
>> --image UbuntuLTS `
>> --admin-username azureuser `
>> --generate-ssh-keys

VM created:
{
  "fqdns": "",
  "id": "/subscriptions/0f39574d-d756-48cf-b622-0e27a6943bd2/resourceGroups/72-d63a26b0-accessing-and-using-the-azure-cloud-sh/providers/Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines/LabVM",
  "location": "centralus",
  "macAddress": "00-22-48-49-B9-18",
  "powerState": "VM running",
  "privateIpAddress": "10.0.0.4",
  "publicIpAddress": "40.77.68.79",
  "resourceGroup": "72-d63a26b0-accessing-and-using-the-azure-cloud-sh",
  "zones": ""
}

Remove-AzVM -Name LabVM -ResourceGroupName 72-d63a26b0-accessing-and-using-the-azure-cloud-sh

----- ARM Templates -----


-------------------------

Azure Architecture 

Regions and AvZones 

Latency is the time taken for data to travel from source to destination.

Latency-define perimeter - time taken for data to travel from one data center to another (less than 2ms).
Regional low-latency network - a fiber connection between data centers in the region.

Region
A region is a set of datacenters within a latency-defined perimeter and connect through a dedicated regional low-latency network.

Availability zones
Each AvZone is a physical location within a region.
Each AvZone has its own power, cooling and networking.
Each Region has a minimum of 3 AzZones.

Azure availability zones are physically separate locations within each Azure region that are tolerant to local failures. Tolerance to failures is achieved because of redundancy and logical isolation of Azure services. To ensure resiliency, a minimum of three separate availability zones are present in all availability zone-enabled regions. Azure availability zones are connected by a high-performance network with a round-trip latency of less than 2ms. Each zone is composed of one or more datacenters equipped with independent power, cooling, and networking infrastructure. Availability zones are designed so that if one zone is affected, regional services, capacity, and high availability are supported by the remaining two zones. With availability zones, you can design and operate applications and databases that automatically transition between zones without interruption. Azure availability zones are highly available, fault tolerant, and more scalable than traditional single or multiple datacenter infrastructures. Each data center is assigned to a physical zone. Physical zones are mapped to logical zones in your Azure subscription.

How to choose a region:
Location
Features
Price

Paired Regions
Each region is paired within the same geographic area with another region except Brazil South which is paired with South Central US.
If the primary region has an outage you can failover to the secondary region.
Only one region in a pair is updated at any one time.
Some services use paired regions for replication.

Resource Groups

A resource group is a container that holds related resources for an Azure solution.
Each resource can only exist in a single resource group.
Resources can be added or removed from a RG at any time.
Resources can be moved from one RG to another.
Resources from multiple regions can be in one RG.
Users can be given access to a RG and everything in it.
Resources can interact with other resources in different RGs.
A RG has a region & it stores metadata about the Resources in it.

ARM

Azure Resource Manager is the deployment and management service for Azure. 
It provides a management layer that enables you to create, update, and delete resources in your Azure account. 
You use management features, like access control, locks, and tags, to secure and organize your resources after deployment.

- deploy, manage & monitor resources in a group
- deploying resources consistently  
- define dependencies between resources
- define access rights
- tag resources 
- identify billing 

----- Cloud Concepts -----
Cloud Computing is the on demand availability of compute, networking and storage resources.

High Availability
VMs can spin up fast when required
If hardware fails, replace instantly -> Clusters
Zero downtime not guaranteed

Fault Tolerance
  Resilience - Fault tolerance
  Zero Down-Time - faults are mitigated
 
Disaster Recovery
  Natural Catastrophes or Cyber Attacks
  Plan to recover business systems
  Designated Recovery Time & Point

Scalability - add/remove resources as and when needed
  Scale out - add 
  Scale in  - remove 
  Scale up  - bigger 
  Scale down - smaller 
  
Elasticity - quickly expand/decrease resources -> Elasticity enables scaling

Agility - ability to rapidly dev/test/dep apps -> allows businesses to focus on provisioning, maintenance & analysis

CapEx - money spent by a business to acquire/maintain fixed assets - land, buildings, equipment etc.

OpEx - Ongoing cost of running a product, business or system - electricity, website hosting, printer cartridges etc

Cloud Compueting Services moves costs from CapEx (Large Upfront Investments) to OpEx (Pay-as-you-go).

Pay:
   Per Execution
   Per Second
   Combo

Cloud Service Models

IAAS
Infra = actual servers/VMs, Networks, Buildings
Fast scaling
No HW ownership

PAAS
Superset of IAAS 
PAAS = IAAS + Middleware + Tools
Supports Web App LifeCycle
Avoids SW licensing issues

SAAS
SAAS = PAAS + Apps
provides a managed service
pay access fee
no maintenance 
latest features

e.g MS 365

Serverless
Azure Functions
Extreme PAAS

Shared Responsibility Model

Azure Marketplace

Cloud Architecture Model
Private
Pros
  - complete control of infra
  - benefits of public cloud
  - better security n privacy

Cons
  - maintenance
  - staffing

Public
Pros
  - no HW purchase
  - low monthly fees

Cons
  - no control over features/version
  - no physical access

Hybrid
Pros
  - avoid disruptions/outages
  - adhere to regulations/governance
  - span both pub/priv cloud
  - alleviate CapEx investments

Cons
  - complex infra

-------- Azure Architecture ---------

Region 
A region is a set of datacenters deployed within a latency-defined perimeter and connected thru a dedicated low-latency network.

Choosing a Region 
Location
Features
Price

Paired Regions
Outage Failover - move from pri to sec region
Planned Updates
Replication

AvZones
Unique physical region - min 3 zones

-------------------------------------

------ Compute -------

Any service that enables computation

VMs
A VM is your machine exclusively.
No HW ownership.
VMs are an IaaS offering - u r responsible for the entire machine.
Az VMs take advantage of Az tools.
Pricing goes up as resources go up and u pay by the hours.

Scale Sets
A group of identical, load balanced VMs.
ScSets are identical VMs which can be activated/deactivated as needed.
A baseline VM is used to create VMs.
Pay as u use.

Multiple VMs -easy management using a load balancer
HiAv - If one VM fails, the others in the ScSet takeover.
Auto Scaling - Auto match demand by +/- VMs from the ScSet.
Large Scale - Run upto 1000 VMs in a single ScSet.
No extra cost.

App Services
Fully managed platform

Azure Container Service
servres, network and storage are managed by Az.
Businesses focus on Logic/Bus value.

App services are a PaaS offering on Az
Web Apps - web sites
Web Apps for Containers
API Apps - data backend services

Az Container Instances
Manage App Dependencies
Less overhead
Increased portability
Efficiency
Consistency

Primary Az service for running container workloads - process/app
Use containerized apps to process data on demand - create containers only when needed
Use Az Portal/CLI/Powershell to work with containers

Az Kub Service
Kub is an open-source container orchestration system for auto app dep scale & mgmt.

Az Container Registry

Azure Virtual Desktop

Functions
smallest compute service on Az
a single function of compute
invoked via URL
runs once and stops

runs only when there is data to process
saves money
resilience

----------------------
Networking

VNet
Address Space - a range of IP addresses available for a VNet
Subnet 
  - segment VNet into smaller unites for secure and logical distribution of resources
  - group resources onto the same subnet to keep an overview
  - more efficient to allocate addresses to resources on a smaller subnet
  - use network sec groups to secure individual subnets

A Vnet belongs to a single region. Each resource on on the VNet must be in the same region.
A VNet belongs to just one subscription. One SubSc can have multiple VNets.

Scaling   - adding more VNets or more addresses to one is simple.
HiAv      - peering VNets using LoadBal/VPNGate increases HiAv.
Isolation - manage/org resources with subnets & netsec groups.

VNet Peering 
Connects 2 or more VNets in Azure
Traffic between VMs in a peered VNet passes thru the private Microsoft backbone net and not the public internet.

Peering Benefits
Low Latency High BW - resources in VNets are connected with a low-lat hi-BW connection.
Link Separate Nets  - resources in separate VNets can communicate with each other.
Data Transfer       - transfer data easily between subscriptions & deployment models in separate regions.




















